climate-assets: objects or services of value to humans that can get destroyed or diminished by climate-hazards. Key categories are health, buildings, infrastructure, and crops or livestock.
climate-datasets: specific collections of climate data with a name. A climate dataset can be the result of observations or of a model, e.g., as a prediction or reanalysis. The data may be lists, tables, databases, inventories or historical records, where the data dominate over attached code.
climate-greenhouse-gases: gases that cause heating of the atmosphere (greenhouse gases).
climate-hazards: hazards with potential negative impact on climate, such as floods, wildfires, droughts, and heatwaves. Where a hazard is named in more detail in a text, the entire term is annotated, e.g., surface water flood or soil liquefaction.
climate-impacts: effects of hazards, primarily negative effects on humans. We also consider impacts on livestock as impacts, as it indirectly affects humans.
climate-mitigations: activities to reduce climate change or to better deal with the consequences.
climate-models: specific physical, mathematical, or artificial intelligence objects, nowadays always computer-executable, used to analyze and usually predict climate parameters.
climate-nature: aspects of nature that are not alive, such as oceans, rivers, the atmosphere, winds, and snow.
climate-observations: climate observation tools with a name. Examples are satellites, radiospectrometers, rain gauges, wildlife cameras, and questionnaires.
climate-organisms: animals, plants, and other organisms that are considered for their own sakes (in contrast to as food for humans) as climate organisms.
climate-organizations: real-world organizations with climate-related interests.
climate-problem-origins: problems that describe why the climate is changing. Key examples are fossil fuel and deforestation. We also mention sectors that can be cited as causes of energy use. For instance, in a text about the energy consumption by the transport sector, transport sector is annotated as problem.
climate-properties: properties of the climate itself (not abstract objects like models and datasets) that typically come with values and units.